Characterization of XynC from Bacillus subtilis subsp. subtilis strain 168 and analysis of its role in depolymerization of glucuronoxylan. Secretion of xylanase activities by Bacillus subtilis 168 supports the development of this well-defined genetic system for conversion of methylglucuronoxylan (MeGAXn [where n represents the number of xylose residues]) in the hemicellulose component of lignocellulosics to biobased products. In addition to the characterized glycosyl hydrolase family 11 (GH 11) endoxylanase designated XynA, B. subtilis 168 secretes a second endoxylanase as the translated product of the ynfF gene. This sequence shows remarkable homology to the GH 5 endoxylanase secreted by strains of Erwinia chrysanthemi. To determine its properties and potential role in the depolymerization of MeGAXn, the ynfF gene was cloned and overexpressed to provide an endoxylanase, designated XynC, which was characterized with respect to substrate preference, kinetic properties, and product formation. With different sources of MeGAXn as the substrate, the specific activity increased with increasing methylglucuronosyl substitutions on the beta-1,4-xylan chain. With MeGAXn from sweetgum as a preferred substrate, XynC exhibited a Vmax of 59.9 units/mg XynC, a Km of 1.63 mg MeGAXn/ml, and a k(cat) of 2,635/minute at pH 6.0 and 37 degrees C. Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry and 1H nuclear magnetic resonance data revealed that each hydrolysis product has a single glucuronosyl substitution penultimate to the reducing terminal xylose. This detailed analysis of XynC from B. subtilis 168 defines the unique depolymerization process catalyzed by the GH 5 endoxylanases. Based upon product analysis, B. subtilis 168 secretes both XynA and XynC. Expression of xynA was subject to MeGAXn induction; xynC expression was constitutive with growth on different substrates. Translation and secretion of both GH 11 and GH 5 endoxylanases by the fully sequenced and genetically malleable B. subtilis 168 recommends this bacterium for the introduction of genes required for the complete utilization of products of the enzyme-catalyzed depolymerization of MeGAXn. B. subtilis may serve as a model platform for development of gram-positive biocatalysts for conversion of lignocellulosic materials to renewable fuels and chemicals.